---
layout: post
title: "Qubes OS 4.0 reaches EOL on 2022-08-04"
categories:
  - announcements
  - releases
author: Andrew David Wong
---

Qubes OS 4.0 is scheduled to reach end-of-life (EOL) on 2022-08-04 --- one
month from the date of this announcement.


## What about patch releases?

The Qubes OS Project uses the [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/)
standard. Version numbers are written as `[major].[minor].[patch]`. When a
major or minor release reaches EOL, all of its patch releases also reach EOL.
For example, in this case, when we say that "Qubes 4.0" (without specifying a
`<patch>` number) is approaching EOL, we're specifying a particular minor
release, inclusive of all patch releases within it. This means that Qubes
4.0.0, 4.0.1, 4.0.2, 4.0.3, and 4.0.4 will all reach EOL at the same time (on
2022-08-04), since they are all just patch releases of the same minor release.


## How are EOL dates determined?

According to our [support policy](/doc/supported-releases/), stable Qubes OS
releases are supported for six months after each subsequent [major or minor
release](/doc/version-scheme/). This means that Qubes 4.0 reaches EOL six
months after Qubes 4.1 was released. Since Qubes 4.1.0 was [released on
2022-02-04](/news/2022/02/04/qubes-4-1-0/), Qubes 4.0's EOL date is six months
later, on 2022-08-04.

Fun fact: Qubes 4.0.0 was [initially released on
2018-03-28](/news/2018/03/28/qubes-40/), which means that it will be four
years, four months, and one week old when it reaches EOL. That's the longest
support period for a stable Qubes release in our project's history!


## What should I do?

First off, if you're already using Qubes 4.1, then you don't have to do
anything. This announcement doesn't affect you.

However, if you've stood by the venerable Qubes 4.0 till now, then you'll want
to make sure you upgrade to Qubes 4.1 by 2022-08-04. *When* you upgrade,
though, depends on a few factors. You have several options (in no particular
order):

- Perform an [in-place upgrade](/doc/upgrade/4.1/#in-place-upgrade) any time
  between now and 2022-08-04.

- Perform a clean install now using the stable Qubes 4.1.0 ISO, which was
  [published on 2022-02-04](/news/2022/02/04/qubes-4-1-0/).

- Perform a clean install now using the [first release candidate for Qubes
  4.1.1](/news/2022/06/27/qubes-4-1-1-rc1/).

- Wait to see whether the stable Qubes 4.1.1 ISO is published within the next
  month.

Allow me to explain what I mean by the last option: While we certainly *hope*
to be able to announce the stable 4.1.1 release within the next few weeks, we
cannot *guarantee* that outcome. After all, the entire point of having release
candidates is because sometimes major bugs are discovered in builds that were
thought to be nearly ready for release. While we don't expect any, we can never
be certain that no such bug will be found.

So, for those looking for a clean installation option, the main advantage of
the existing 4.1.0 ISO is that it is already available *right now*, while
there's a decent chance but no guarantee that the stable 4.1.1 ISO will be
ready in time. Meanwhile, the release candidate is intended for testers and
adventurous types who don't mind a bit of risk. The release candidates are not
intended for cases in which system reliability is required for important work.

The main *disadvantage* of the existing 4.1.0 ISO is that it's quite old by
now. It's missing some security updates (which you should download immediately
after installing, if you choose to go that route) and comes with an old Fedora
template that has already reached EOL (which you should upgrade immediately
after installing or refrain from using in favor of other templates).

If you're not in any particular hurry to upgrade (and, if you've been content
to stick with 4.0 until now, then you're probably not), one strategy is simply
to wait until closer to the EOL date, and see whether the stable 4.1.1 ISO
arrives in time. If it does, great! You can preform a clean install using that.
If it doesn't, then you haven't lost anything. You still have the same choices
you have right now. Just make sure you to leave yourself enough time to upgrade
one way or another!
